---
layout: chapter
title: Foundations of Heat Transfer
prev: applications.html 
next: exercises.html
--- 

## Modes of Heat Transfer

Energy transfer owing to temperature difference is called heat transfer. The transport of thermal energy can happen in three different modes
- conduction
- convection
- radiation

In reality, all the three modes are present. However, the relative strengths of these modes vary in different scenarios. The characteristic equations for each of these modes are as follows

| -
| Mode | Equation 
| :-: | :-
| Conduction | $$\vec{q''}=-k \vec{\nabla T}$$
| Convection | $$\vec{q''}=h(T_w-T_0) \hat{n}_w$$
| Radiation | $$\vec{q''}=\epsilon \sigma (T^4-T_0^4) \hat{n}_w$$

where\
$$\vec{q''}$$ is the heat flux per unit area (away from the surface/along $$\hat{n}_w$$)\
$$k$$ is the thermal conductivity of the medium\
$$h$$ is the heat transfer coefficient of the configuration\
$$\epsilon$$ is the emissivity of the surface\
$$\sigma=5.67 \times 10^{-8} W/m^2K^4$$ is the Stefan Boltzmann constant

In this course, we will restrict ourselves to convective mode of heat transfer.

> Convection = Conduction + Advection 

Conduction is a diffussion process. By diffusion, we mean the particles/carriers of thermal energy do not have any preferential direction of movement. However, the extent of this movement is proportional to the energy of the carriers. The carriers at higher temperature have higher energy. The differential rates of these movement appears as the transport of energy in a direction from higher to lower. 

Advection is an active transport process. The carriers transport the thermal energy through their momentum which in turn could be generated by an external pressure field. Hence, such a transport will have a preferential direction for movement of carriers. 

In general, both these processes exist simultaneously, and we consider a superposition of these two effects in the upcoming classes.

## Classification of Flows

### External and Internal Flows

<div style="display: flex; gap: 16px; align-items: flex-start;">
<figure style="display: inline-block; text-align: center;">
    <svg width="100%" height="100%" viewBox="0 0 400 200" overflow="visible">
        <path id="motionPath1" d="M 10 0 H 400" stroke="black" />
        <path id="motionPath2" d="M 10 160 H 400" stroke="black" />
        <path id="motionPath3" d="M 10 40 H 140 Q 200 10 260 40 H 400" stroke="black" fill="none" />
        <path id="motionPath4" d="M 10 120 H 140 Q 200 150 260 120 H 400" stroke="black" fill="none" />
        <path class="triangle" d="M 0 0 L -5 5 V -5 Z" fill="black" />
        <path class="triangle" d="M 0 0 L -5 5 V -5 Z" fill="black" />
        <path class="triangle" d="M 0 0 L -5 5 V -5 Z" fill="black" />
        <path class="triangle" d="M 0 0 L -5 5 V -5 Z" fill="black" />
        <circle cx="200" cy="80" r="40" fill="blue" opacity="0.4" />
    </svg>
    <figcaption>Illustration of external flow around an object</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure style="display: inline-block; text-align: center;">
    <svg width="100%" height="100%" viewBox="0 0 400 170" overflow="visible">
        <path id="top" d="M 0 0 H 400" stroke="black" stroke-width="3"/>
        <path id="p1" d="M 0 40 H 400" stroke="black"/>
        <path id="p2" d="M 0 75 H 400" stroke="black"/>
        <path id="p3" d="M 0 110 H 400" stroke="black"/>
        <path id="bottom" d="M 0 150 H 400" stroke="black" stroke-width="3"/>
        <path class="triangle" d="M -20 0 L -25 5 V -5 Z" fill="black" />
        <path class="triangle" d="M 0 0 L -5 5 V -5 Z" fill="black" />
        <path class="triangle" d="M -20 0 L -25 5 V -5 Z" fill="black" />
    </svg>
    <figcaption>Illustration of internal flow between two parallel plates</figcaption>
</figure>

<script>
const pathIds = ['#motionPath1', '#motionPath2', '#motionPath3', '#motionPath4',
                '#p1','#p2','#p3'];
const triangles = document.querySelectorAll('.triangle');

triangles.forEach((triangle, i) => {
    const path = anime.path(pathIds[i]);
    anime({
        targets: triangle,
        translateX: path('x'),
        translateY: path('y'),
        rotate: path('angle'),
        duration: 4000,
        loop: true,
        easing: 'linear'
        });
    });
</script>
</div>

### Forced, Mixed and Natural Convection Flows

In forced convection, we have a fan or blower or pump to drive the flow. This driver is present near the boundaries of our region of interest.

In natural convection, we have body forces like buoyancy driving the flow. A buoyancy source will be present in our region of interest.

Even though both driving forces are present, the effect on our object of interest (usually the net heat flux from a surface) might not be strongly related with all the driving forces. In upcoming sessions, we will look at a way to estimate the relative strengths of these forces on the net heat transfer. 

If both the forces exert similar orders of effect, then we consider that a mixed convective flow.

Consider the smoke coming out of a chimney as shown below. The slider position is proportional to the wind speed. Thus, increasing the slider increases the strength of forced convection. 

<svg width="50%" height="100%" viewBox="0 0 600 200">
  <rect x="180" y="150" width="40" height="50" stroke="black" fill="none" opacity="0.6"/>
  <path id="smoke" d="M220 150 Q 220 100 230 50 L 170 50 Q 180 100 180 150 Z" fill="gray" opacity="0.2" stroke-width="0.1"/>
  <path id="particlePath" d="M 200 150 Q 200 100 200 40" fill="none"/>
  <circle id="particle" r="2" fill="black" />
</svg>

<script>
function animateSmoke(speed) {
    const smokePath = `M220 150 Q 220 100 ${230+speed} ${50+speed/5} L ${170+speed*0.9} ${50-speed/5} Q 180 100 180 150 Z`;
    const particlePath = `M 200 150 Q 200 100 ${200+speed} ${40+speed/5}`;

    anime({
        targets: '#smoke',
        d: [{ value: smokePath }],
        duration: 1000,
        easing: 'easeInOutQuad'
    });

    anime({
        targets: '#particlePath',
        d: [{ value: particlePath }],
        duration: 1000,
        easing: 'easeInOutQuad',
        complete: function() {
            // After path morph is complete, update the path function and animate the particle
            const path = anime.path('#particlePath');
            anime({
                targets: "#particle",
                translateX: path('x'),
                translateY: path('y'),
                rotate: path('angle'),
                duration: 5000,
                loop: true,
                easing: 'linear'
            });
        }
    });
}
</script>

<label for="windSlider">Wind Speed:</label>
<input type="range" id="windSlider" min="0" max="400" value="0" />
<script>
  const slider = document.getElementById('windSlider');
  animateSmoke(Number(slider.value));
  slider.addEventListener('input', function() {
    animateSmoke(Number(this.value));
  });
</script>

If you were to draw a free body diagram for the particle as it travels along, how would the plots of horizontal and vertical forces on the particle look like?

{% include hideAns.html content="As we can see that though the particle initially started to move vertically upwards, the relative increase in the horizontal force is too high to deviate the particle from its original path." %}

## Incompressible Flow Equations

The governing equations for an unsteady, incompressible, newtonian and constant properties fluid are given in their vector form as 

Continuity:
$$ 
\vec{\nabla}.\vec{v} = 0
$$

Momentum:
$$
\rho \left(\frac{\partial \vec{v}}{\partial t} + \vec{v}.\vec{\nabla} \vec{v} \right) = -\vec{\nabla p} + \mu \nabla^2 \vec{v} + \rho \vec{g}
$$

where\
$$\vec{v} = u \hat{i} + v \hat{j} + w \hat{k}$$ is the velocity field\
$$p$$ is the pressure field\
$$\rho$$ is the density of the fluid\
$$\mu$$ is the kinematic viscosity of the fluid\
$$\vec{g}$$ is the acceleration due to gravity\
$$t$$ is the time

For a 3D cartesian co-ordinate system, the equations are as follows

Continuity:
$$ 
\frac{\partial u}{\partial x} + \frac{\partial v}{\partial y} + \frac{\partial w}{\partial z}=0
$$

X-momentum:
$$
\rho \left( \frac{\partial u}{\partial t} + u\frac{\partial u}{\partial x} + v\frac{\partial u}{\partial y} + w\frac{\partial u}{\partial z} \right) = -\frac{\partial p}{\partial x} + \mu \left( \frac{\partial^2 u}{\partial x^2} + \frac{\partial^2 u}{\partial y^2} +\frac{\partial^2 u}{\partial z^2} \right) + \rho g_x
$$

Y-momentum:
$$
\rho \left( \frac{\partial v}{\partial t} + u\frac{\partial v}{\partial x} + v\frac{\partial v}{\partial y} + w\frac{\partial v}{\partial z} \right) = -\frac{\partial p}{\partial y} + \mu \left( \frac{\partial^2 v}{\partial x^2} + \frac{\partial^2 v}{\partial y^2} +\frac{\partial^2 v}{\partial z^2} \right) + \rho g_y
$$

Z-momentum:
$$
\rho \left( \frac{\partial w}{\partial t} + u\frac{\partial w}{\partial x} + v\frac{\partial w}{\partial y} + w\frac{\partial w}{\partial z} \right) = -\frac{\partial p}{\partial z} + \mu \left( \frac{\partial^2 w}{\partial x^2} + \frac{\partial^2 w}{\partial y^2} +\frac{\partial^2 w}{\partial z^2} \right) + \rho g_z
$$

Observe that the continuity equation does not have any time derivative. This is because of our assumption where the properties are constant. However, it is interesting to note that for low speed flows the above equation still holds[^1]. 

### Boundary Conditions

- Dirichlet: a constant value of the quantity is specified
- Neumann: the gradient is specified
- Mixed: a linear combination of the above two is specified

## References

[^1]: [Babu, V. (2022). Basic Concepts in Incompressible Flows. In: Fundamentals of Incompressible Fluid Flow. Springer, Cham.](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-74656-8_2)